---
title: "Creating the makefile"
date: 2023-11-23T15:15:13+01:00
draft: false
---
First thing we want to do is create a makefile, which organize code compilation. To properly compile C code you have to enter a series of flags to include libraries and define which files you would like to include. This is the desired structure:
```
Game Folder
├── src
│   ├── main.c
│   └── constants.h
├── makefile
└── game
```
These are the necessary files for our project, where **game** is generated in our makefile. At this moment you do not have any of these yet so let's get started by going to our **Game Folder** folder and typing:

```mkdir src```

This will create our `src` folder, then we can follow that up with creating the files:

```touch makefile src/main.c src/constants.h```

Now we have our makefile, and our src where we have our `main.c` file. That is where all the code will be stored. Let's open up our makefile and add the following line:

```
build:
	gcc -Wall -std=c99 ./src/*.c -lSDL2 -o game
```

Here we build all (`-Wall`) with the c99 standard, and we build all in the relative path of src, and fetch all files which end with c. Finally, we include our SDL2 and output our game. Great! We now have a way to build our application which is very nice, but maybe we need some configuration to run it too? Let's add the following to the make file:

```
run:
	./game
```

This will run our game file which is generated by our build command. It is very simple and not really necessary at this point, but if in the future we ever need to change the way we run our program we can do this easily here.

Finally I want to be able to also clean the project when I need to get rid of it (for whatever reason) so we add this command as well.

```
clean:
	rm game
```

**Note:** though this may seem superfluous it is best practice, so when we make the project more advanced we only have to change our build commands.
